(upbeat music)
- Well, welcome to the Get Fit with Jodel podcast.
I'm Jodel and I have Dr. Ray Peat back with me again
to answer your questions.
And boy, did we get a slew of questions this time, Dr. Peat.
I took a hiatus from podcasts for a while
to do some reflection during all this public health issue.
And I think the questions piled up,
so I hope you are ready.
May I ask how you've been since it's been a little bit
since we've talked, how have you been doing?
- Very well, investigating as far as I can
what's been going on.
My first reaction was that I couldn't see any pandemic.
And the last information I have,
even looking at the figures at the CDC,
even though they make this information
something you have to add up for yourself,
but their figures are now supporting
the very earliest estimates of the professors at Stanford
who are also saying nothing is happening.
The mortality from this virus is right in the range
of a traditional flu influence of mortality
about one fourth of a percent.
- Wow, I mean, I've heard you talk on other podcasts
with similar statistics, and it's just like,
I see where the world is kind of in that fear monger state,
but it really begs a lot of questions
about the severity of it.
We do have a question coming up later on
from one of the listeners who was concerned
about it, so I'm looking forward
to getting to that with you.
I do have to tell you that you inspired me
during this reflection time, I call it,
like I took some time off when we were all stuck at home
to work on a hiking trail on our property behind our home.
So I was in the backyard chopping wood down
and raking a trail, and I fell in love with it.
And I thought of you a lot, how you talked about
cultivating things with your hands.
And I've always loved being outdoors,
but during this time of cultivating the land
and creating something, I realized that I wanted
less time on social media outlets and more time
to give to my family and to creative processes,
so to speak, so I decided to completely shut down
my Get Fit with Jodell Facebook.
I completely closed it down with over 4,000 followers,
because I realized, Dr. Peat, that you are still able,
you yourself are still able to help a lot of people,
and you're not on social media, and you have a website,
you have the ability to podcast with different people,
you have your newsletter, that you reach out
to a lot of hearts and minds, and you probably have no idea
how many lives you have affected
just by answering people's questions.
So in short, I'm commending you for that,
but also I'm inspired to do the same thing.
So I've resigned to be only, people will only find me
on YouTube and not on Facebook, not on Instagram,
not anywhere else, so that I'm not constantly
having to devote my time, my precious time
to the social media pressures of life,
but rather to those who are truly seeking answers,
like our listeners.
So people that are coming to your podcast, Dr. Peat,
I've found that these are the ones really asking questions
and seeking answers to their health,
and I've found that social media is more geared
for people to just numb out.
It's not a place where people are seeking help,
but rather they're just zoning out,
they're just ready to not think,
so let me just go through my feed.
But I feel like honing in on one outlet of podcasting
with you and other like-minded folks
instead of so many other outlets,
and really help our listeners and build the community too.
So long story short, here's my question to you, Dr. Peat.
You discuss how powerful that stress is a negative
in our life, like it's so powerful
this stress in our lives, and I feel like
social media outlets are one of the biggest stressors
that people aren't really aware of.
They're doing it every day, but I don't think
they're aware of the pressures of social media.
So I wanted your thoughts on social media
and its pressures of posting and getting likes
and approvals from others, and being on devices,
which is a whole nother thing.
Do you think that this is one of the main concerns
and causes of why people have a lot of health issues
nowadays as opposed to 20, 30 years ago
when we didn't have these social pressures
of online presences?
- I have never experienced Facebook or Twitter
or any of those things myself, but I see people
being deeply involved in their cell phone
or their computers, and that's something that,
oh, 50 years ago or more, there wasn't even that
absorption in TV.
TV was just starting to be an obsessive part of the culture.
But my family didn't even have a TV
until I was long out of college.
I think I had been out of college several years
before we borrowed a TV to watch Kennedy's inauguration.
But even TV, I'm sure it's damaging kids
to sit around inertly watching stories
which are very cleverly designed propagandistically.
The Pentagon is now a part of the Hollywood industry.
They even invested in the latest technology development
for Hollywood to create realistic images
that can be mistaken for the real thing.
They can forge voices and personalities
and the Pentagon can operate,
one person can operate many personalities on Facebook
or the other social media, so people are interacting
very often with computers that they think are human.
And it's not only stressful, but it's creating a dream world
and the dream world people can be manipulated to do
what the Pentagon or the CDC or the giant corporations
want them to do.
Google, several years ago, sociologists demonstrated
how by changing the definition of questions
on a search engine, they could absolutely skew
the way people voted in real elections.
And Google is obviously doing that.
They can control the elections.
And Congress worries about Russians or Trump
or Ukrainians or whatever interfering with US elections,
but the very powerful demonstrated effect of Google
on elections is ignored, apparently because Congress
is bought off by the people who control the elections
and are pleased with how they're turning out.
- There are so many rabbit holes.
I wanna go down with that, but I do remember,
somebody recently told me that television
actually stems from the kind of phrase, tell a vision.
So like you said, a dream world where they're kind of
programming us to not think for ourselves,
but here, let me tell you a vision that you need to believe
in and be a part of, yeah.
No, so yeah, so I can definitely see your point
about how it is a stressor and even television,
not just social media, but just the idea of not being able
to think for ourselves.
That's kind of something to be concerned about
and how we might wanna dial back on our social media outlets
and really focus on where is my time devoted to?
How much time am I spending bettering myself
versus lessening myself with the energy suck
that is a lot of device time and social media time?
Yeah, okay, well, I love that.
And before time gets away from us,
I guess we should jump into everyone else's questions.
So I have a slew of questions.
If we don't get to all of you guys' questions today,
then I'll put them in the next one that we do.
But I wanted to give a big shout out to a guy named Matt.
He's a researcher at Harvard
and he asked a question a while back, Dr. Peat,
and I never got to ask you this,
but it's just an interesting question about adaptogen.
So Matt would like to know your thoughts on adaptogen herbs
such as ashwagandha and rhodiola for helping with cortisol.
Oh, there are several levels that they work at.
Some of them are boosting the steroids.
Like ginseng has androgenic steroid materials in it
that actually support, but our natural hormones
like pregnenolone and DHEA are the body's adaptogens.
And so things that work with them
are simply supporting our body's stabilizing effect.
There are two kinds of adaptation.
One, the emergency system that pours out cortisol
and all of the stress-related steroids and other hormones.
These powerfully help you survive an immediate matter
of minutes, seconds, and hours.
But then they become counterproductive
and reduce your adaptability
if they aren't backed up by increased energy production,
which means anything that supports mitochondrial stability
and health and good thyroid function
and the ability to produce increased amounts
of the stabilizing DHEA, pregnenolone and progesterone.
And the basic long range adaptogen
is this stable energy production,
keeping your mitochondria producing energy
at a high rate and without producing toxic side effects.
An emergency activation with adrenaline
tends to produce lots of free radical side effects,
but the proper high energy production
running on the basis of thyroid activity,
you are actually wasting energy in the sense
that you're producing a tremendous amount of heat,
but that use of oxygen to produce energy
is actually reducing the toxic side effects.
So becoming an inefficient machine
that operates at a high temperature
and seeming to waste energy,
that's actually the proper route to long range adaptability.
You assimilate and overcome by changing
the nature of the threat and the stress,
rather than being forced to change your body's structure
or behavior by the cortisol acute stress route.
- Okay.
- And probably the single most important factor
in staying on this route of long range
protective adaptability is the production of carbon dioxide
and the ability to suppress lactic acid formation.
That the acute stress, if you lack adaptability,
pours out a lot of lactic acid
with lots of bad consequences in the long run.
The ability to make carbon dioxide
by running your mitochondria at high energy,
why that is protected is that they are generating
carbon dioxide which suppresses the free radicals
and keeps lactic acid under control,
keeps the whole system in an oxidizing state.
The reducing or pseudo hypoxic state
is the destructive stress state
that everything should be geared towards getting over.
- Okay, that's good.
I like your thought.
I've never thought of it in that terms of adaptogens.
I mean, I know we want long-term adaptability,
but no, I never thought of it like that, so.
Michael asks, now this is an interesting question, Dr. Peat.
What are Dr. Peat's existential fears?
- Currently, the insanity of the ruling class
has been long range at things
since I was three or four years old.
I started seeing sadism and cruelty in everyone in power,
but the long range trend over all these years
is that the ruling class is becoming more confident
of its ability to go right to the final state.
This pandemic and the behavior of the CDC
and all of its supporting agencies.
I think this is a threatening existence of life itself.
- Yeah, I would second those fears.
I'm with you.
Okay, M. Anderson asks, please ask Dr. Peat
about caffeine and coffee addiction.
How can caffeine be good if it is habit-forming?
Caffeine triggers cortisol release.
How can this be good?
What about acrylamide in carcinogen?
I'm sorry, what about acrylamide,
the carcinogen chemical that's released
when organic matter is half burned like roasted coffee beans?
Many people get problems with insomnia.
Anxiety become edgy due to coffee.
Quitting coffee, old turkey.
I think she means cold turkey.
Gives me terrible withdrawal.
Why bother with coffee, Dr. Peat?
- A part of that type of reaction is because
the lack of a properly coffee-consuming technology
like the Japanese have their tea ceremony.
We need a better coffee-consuming technique
which involves good, thick cream
because cream slows the absorption of the caffeine.
The people who have the terrible reactions
are usually hypothyroid and have a blood sugar problem.
They take black coffee off and on an empty stomach
instead of eating and it drives their adrenaline
and cortisol into a frenzy of tissue-damaging stress.
using coffee only with food,
never on an empty stomach unless there's plenty
of cream or milk with it.
Coffee con leche is a good method of taking it.
But heavy cream, if you like the flavor of rich coffee,
cream improves the flavor while slowing the absorption.
And if you look at the effects of caffeine,
for more than 50 years, studies in animals
of all sorts have demonstrated that caffeine
is so powerfully carcinogenic that it can be given
with concentrated cigarette smoke,
a very powerful carcinogen.
And just a little caffeine added prevents
the carcinogenicity of topically applied cigarette smoke.
And that observation led people to test them
against other carcinogens.
Even viral carcinogenesis is inhibited by caffeine,
even radiation carcinogenesis,
the most absolute form is suppressed by caffeine.
And so it would be good if we didn't burn the coffee,
that technology comes from partly the fact that people
like the taste of a smoky burn things.
And partly because it softens the bean
and makes it easier to grind to get the caffeine out.
Like the technology of fermenting tea,
making black tea releases lots more caffeine than green tea.
So black tea is really biologically much more effective as an anti-stress, anti-cancer agent.
So the present way of preparing coffee
isn't the ideal, it's just part of the tradition
and it turns out that the more coffee people drink,
five cups and up, for example,
are the healthiest in general,
even a lower rate of Alzheimer's disease,
of cancer, heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease even.
So empirically, even though coffee is full
of all of that smoky junk,
which would be best to eliminate
the caffeine override so powerfully.
- I love that you said five cups or more
'cause I'm sitting here going,
"Okay, then I'm gonna live a nice long life."
My grandma was a big coffee drinker and she lived to be 94.
So I believe that there's something
to the health effects of it.
To unpack her question a little bit more,
like what about the habit forming aspect?
Maybe it is something that because it's so medicinal,
it's okay to have a little habit forming with it.
- Yeah but part of that is really what you need.
Before I took any thyroid supplement for many years,
I recognized my symptoms as being typical
of people who were hypothyroid.
For example, being nearsighted
and having migraine headaches
are classical low thyroid signs.
But for various reasons,
just didn't get around to trying a supplement.
And in that period, I would drink
often 50 cups of coffee a day.
And I would stave off the stresses
and the migraines and such.
But I was pouring a huge amount of coffee through my system
just to feel functional, keep my energy up
so I could work efficiently.
First thing I thought of waking up in the morning
was a cup of coffee.
And then I would just constantly
have a cup of coffee in my hand all day.
Within a couple of days,
after I began using a thyroid supplement,
I woke up one morning and noticed something
was very different and I wasn't craving coffee.
And I looked at my coffee drinking behavior
and I was only drinking about five cups a day,
four to five, and that happens spontaneously
over a period of just a few days.
So it wasn't that I was addicted to 50 cups a day.
It was that my system recognized that
as part of its homeostasis.
That could be called an addiction,
but if it's repairing you and preventing disease
and making you live longer,
it's not proper to classify it with addictive things
such as morphine.
Everything about morphine and the opiates,
everything known about it is destructive,
creates inflammation, promotes cancer growth,
degenerative diseases and so on.
It's the basic archetype of a destructive drug
and its addictiveness is just a part of that.
The reason people feel addicted to coffee and caffeine
is mostly that it's filling in for something they need.
There is obviously no need for the opiates.
- I would agree with that because I feel like
I'm the same way.
First thing in the morning I wake up,
I think of coffee and I know--
- The body takes all of those things into account.
Someone did an analysis of the English diet
and even though nutritionists say that
coffee and tea are nutrition free,
this analysis showed that looking at the English diet
as a whole, coffee and tea together
provide 20% of several of the essential nutrients
including some of the B vitamins.
- Yeah, okay, I love that.
There's another reason I need to keep drinking it.
Okay, well, okay, here's one question.
What's your favorite brand of coffee?
What do you drink?
What's your favorite go-to cup of coffee?
- Oh, I don't know.
I usually like, but for taste,
a fairly dark roast or French roast,
but just because of the recognition
that it's got a lot of smoke in it,
I sometimes alternate by drinking a light roast.
If you can find a variety of coffee that's low in acid,
then the light roasts are really very rich tasting.
- Okay, okay, Brandon asks,
okay, he must be dealing with gut dysbiosis
'cause he says, I have SIBO gut dysbiosis
and the foods don't seem to be cutting it
that are carrot salad, bamboo shoots, et cetera,
which, and if they're not working,
which antibiotics might Dr. Peat recommend?
What doses, frequency, and where to locate them online,
if possible, as well can one expect some symptoms
with use of these, thanks as always, Brandon.
- I think the first things are to make sure
that your whole digestive system is working optimally
and your inflammatory reactions are minimal.
And that, two of the most important things
are getting enough thyroid
so that you have quick peristalsis,
quick transit through the intestine.
That simply can keep the bacteria
from having the time necessary to develop
in the upper part of your intestine.
And intense digestive fluids are toxic to bacteria,
helping to keep the intestine clean.
And quick digestion makes you absorb the food,
basically tending to starve the bacteria
by getting it all yourself.
And vitamin D and calcium,
the ratio of calcium to phosphate,
keep your immune system from being oversensitive.
And an inflamed reaction of the immune system
creates an interactive, supportive environment
for the bacteria, for example,
pouring out inflammation, fluids,
containing lactic acid will support bacteria
that produce irritants that create more inflammation
and more lactic acid.
So making sure your calcium, vitamin D and thyroid
are optimized is the first thing.
And then the two types of antibiotic
which have many therapeutic effects
besides killing germs are the tetracycline class
and the erythromycin or azithromycin type.
You've probably heard azithromycin
being recommended for treating the coronavirus.
That fits into the whole picture
that the problem with the virus is the inflammation,
not the presence of replicating viruses.
But the inflammation predisposes you
to support the viruses.
It's the same with bacteria in intestine.
The erythromycin category and the tetracyclines
lower the inflammation directly
apart from killing the bacteria.
So they have several therapeutic functions
and the erythromycin category has the extra property
of stimulating peristalsis.
So it's germicidal, anti-inflammatory
and pro-propulsory propulsion activating effect.
- I'm so glad you answered that the way you did,
like how you gave the recommendation
for like what else could be going on
before you just jump right into antibiotics.
Like you said, what about your thyroid?
Like have they addressed the fact
that they could need more thyroid support?
And I think that's so spot on
because with gut issues you have to make sure
that you're weeding out the bad stuff
before you just bring in all the good stuff
like carrot salad and bamboo shoots.
Those are great.
That's your seed, like weed, seed and feed.
You wanna bring those into like good plants
that you're gonna plant in a garden
but they also have to weed out all the weeds
that could be potentially the cause
for why the gut dyspiosis happened in the first place.
- Yeah, just intensifying the vitality of your organism
that the bacteria can stay there and no one minds them.
So they might be there, you might be eating a lot of turds
but that doesn't do any harm
because the bacteria aren't being stimulated and fed
by the metabolic defects of a sick organism.
- Yeah, and even the commensals, like the good bacteria,
the nice little commensal communities can actually overgrow
and become pathobions or pathogens.
So it's like you really have to look at
what is the major cause behind the dysbiosis
and then address that before you just add
all these other things in
or before you just annihilate the whole gut
with an antibiotic.
Okay, good.
All right, somebody with the title I Love Sugar says,
"Please ask Dr. Peat what causes stretch marks?
"Is it possible to reverse or improve them?"
- One interesting experience that I saw with stretch marks
was a young cousin of mine who was about probably six
or seven months pregnant.
She had these, they looked like
bodice broadness, old-fashioned suspenders
and zigzags of purple and red,
shiny, silvery, scar tissue-like material
all across her abdomen.
She said they had just developed in a few days
and I asked about her diet,
which wasn't terribly bad, but not very good.
But I mentioned oysters and eggs
as having all of the nutrients needed,
especially copper and selenium, zinc and so on.
She came back just, I think it was two or three days later
that said she had eaten a lot of oysters and eggs
and she showed me her belly.
It was absolutely perfect, no stretch marks.
- Wow.
Well, oysters are high in zinc, right?
And I've heard that zinc really can help those
and that some of them with stretch marks
may have a zinc deficiency as well?
- Oh yeah, multiple deficiencies.
Copper is part of the elastin molecule,
so it's a essential factor in keeping your tissue elastic.
It works in blood vessels too for protecting them.
- Okay, so along with your sugar, I love sugar,
you wanna eat some oysters and some eggs too.
(laughing)
Okay, Ebony Gordon says,
can Dr. Peat give advice about treating resistance
to thyroid hormone?
Is it safe to take high dose of T3 for prolonged periods?
Thanks.
- It depends exactly on your need.
For example, I've known people who have had
terrible life-long hypothyroid symptoms,
extreme unopposed estrogen affecting her lung function,
poor oxygenation, very high cortisol,
just extremely fat hips in size and so on.
And basically crippled by her hormone imbalances.
She felt a little better when she had
what her doctor considered the maximum prescription
of armored thyroid, five grains,
which the natural thyroid consists of
about 1/4 T3 and the rest T4
when it's broken down by digestion.
But recognizing that she was recovered partly,
but still crippled, she found another doctor
to prescribe another five grains
and where a normal person at four or five grains
would be a total full replacement
that could make up for total removal of the thyroid gland.
That five grains had only a small effect,
maybe a fourth of what was needed,
indicating that only the T3 in the glandular thyroid
was having a therapeutic effect.
On the second five-grain dose that she added,
she felt basically twice as good.
She found a third doctor over a period of just a few months,
so she was taking 15 grains of armored thyroid.
And if you look at the 1/4 T3 content,
that added up to the equivalent
of four grains or a total whole gland replacement
in the form of only T3.
- Wow.
- She didn't have any hypothyroid symptoms,
but on that dose, it was only a few weeks
and she totally recovered her health
and went down to 10 grains and then five grains.
Her body was simply unable to respond
to anything but T3.
But given that therapeutic dose,
it was only a few weeks before she didn't need that much
and could reduce the dose to a third.
And what happens is that in the absence of thyroid function,
you shift over into all of these maladaptive things
such as high cortisol and estrogen and serotonin
and nitric oxide production,
things that all interfere
with your mitochondrial energy production.
So your body is blocked from responding to the T3.
So you can use pure T3 therapeutically
but when you have used it to help to assimilate the nutrients,
then having assimilated the nutrients,
you are now able to convert T4 to T3 as needed.
And so you can get the full dose out of glandular thyroid
or even a pure thyroxine compound.
What most doctors prescribe.
And in women, the natural predominance of estrogen
compared to men in women is limiting their liver's ability
to convert T4 to T3.
And so women almost always have a very limited
inadequate reaction to T4.
And increasing the dose can interfere
when it reaches a certain excess,
it can begin to displace T3 and have a suppressive effect.
- Okay, and for clarification,
can you tell everybody like,
when you say a grain of thyroid,
can you explain how many milligrams,
like let's say they're on eye armor
or whatever like you mentioned this lady was,
how much would that be with one grain of,
is that like 16 milligrams?
- The traditional grain weight was a little over 60 milligrams
and a five grain tablet,
I think their definition was around 300 milligrams by weight,
maybe a little over 300 milligrams.
- Wow, so she was taking like,
oh my goodness, so many, like 15 grains you said,
so that's like 900 milligrams of thyroid.
Wow, okay, so bottom line is,
sometimes we don't know how much our body actually needs
when it comes to thyroid supplementation,
like you really have to kind of just keep bumping it up
until you feel like you're seeing the results
of an improved thyroid.
- Yeah, it's very important to go,
not only by your symptoms,
but by your waking temperature and pulse rate,
and then the effect of food on your temperature and pulse rate
and your stable daytime resting temperature and pulse rate.
- And so symptoms even like Raynod's,
like if someone has Raynod's
and they're taking thyroid supplement,
but that's still a symptom that's there,
that's an indication that they're not getting enough, correct?
- Yeah, the temperature of a person's
tip of nose, hands and feet,
especially the fingers and toes,
that those can be shut down
in order to keep your core temperature up to the function,
your brain and lungs and heart
have to keep their energy going to maintain the organism,
but under stress, you can cut off the circulation
to the extremities, including your tip of your nose.
So checking the temperature of those,
for example, putting your fingers in your armpit,
if they feel unnaturally cold,
that's a sign of low thyroid.
- Okay, very good.
Lynn Marie asks, I just purchased all of Dr. Peat's books
and some of his newsletters and I'm learning so much,
so that's good.
What are Dr. Peat's thoughts on using
a quality negative ion generator while sleeping?
I've read so many positive things about them.
- For many years, I've kept one operating by my bed.
If I could get more of them at a good price,
I would probably have more of them running,
but if you, for example, if the weather is bad,
you can often notice the effect
that a series of studies in Poland very well,
good experiments, measurements showed that the action
on the lung is to provide the active electrons
reducing electrically the enzymes, mono-amino oxidase,
supporting that enzyme's function in the lung,
which is mainly to destroy circulating serotonin
and serotonin in proportion of your general stress,
but especially of intestinal inflammation.
The intestine pours out a huge amount of serotonin
into the bloodstream and the lungs are the main site
of destroying that serotonin and these studies in Poland
showed clearly that negative ions in the atmosphere
accelerate the detoxing of serotonin.
- Wow, okay, so I guess I need to look into these
'cause I've always heard about them,
but I've never got one, but you make a powerful statement.
Is there a particular brand that you like?
- Yeah, the person who was making the one I got,
which is very good, decided it wasn't profitable enough
and he showed a lot of them and said that the work
was too much for the income, so I don't,
it's a matter of first looking at to make sure
they don't put out a measurable amount of ozone.
That's toxic to the lungs, but you should be able
to feel a cold wind effect when you hold upon your hand
in front of them because there's a stream
of negatively ionized air being driven away
from the electrode that you can feel as an actual streaming.
- All right, well, that's good to know
and I'm sure Lynn appreciates that, too,
'cause she was thinking about it.
So, got a question from Turkish Postman.
How to improve hearing, Dr. Peat,
how do we improve our hearing?
- Classically, thyroid is the most important thing.
Reduces stress and maintains circulation and so on.
But something I noticed when I was on the way to Mexico,
I had a big clock on the wall and I noticed
on route to Mexico I, at a certain distance across the room,
couldn't hear the clock ticking and after just a few weeks
in Mexico, coming back to the same room,
that same clock was loud and clear at the same distance
and the same with eyesight after spending several weeks
at 6600 feet, altitude or higher, myopia increased
by close to two diopters correction.
I went from 11 and 12 down to nine and 10 diopter correction
after just a season at high altitude.
But for the hearing, clearing up took just probably
three weeks or so.
- Oh, that is so cool because I actually,
since improving my thyroid and eating less pufa
and stuff like that after years of researching this stuff
is like, my diopter went from negative 6.75
and I'm down to negative five, so it's slowly improving.
So, it's cool to hear you say that
because I don't think people realize
that you can actually reverse vision problems.
- Yeah, I've seen that happen in girls at puberty
or mid-teen years.
It's very common for a girl to experience
sudden onset of myopia and if they get their thyroid
corrected around the same time, they no longer have myopia.
So, it's prolonged hypothyroidism
that causes progressive myopia.
And the connection between high altitude and thyroid
is that thyroid is what lets your mitochondria
produce carbon dioxide and keep the inflammatory lactate
suppressed at high altitude.
The simple physics of the Bohr-Haldane effect
on hemoglobin, the reduced air pressure
causes your hemoglobin to retain a higher level
of carbon dioxide and so it's creating
the same condition in your body
that optimal thyroid function does.
- Okay, that's awesome.
I love to hear that.
Next question, we're rolling through these.
Okay, Tina asks, what does Dr. Peat think
about molecular hydrogen?
I've seen a lot in the online stores
with molecular hydrogen tablets
and how they improve hydration.
What are your thoughts?
- My interpretation of it goes back to around
50 years ago when I was reading in biochemistry
trying to understand how electrons
and the reduction oxidation process works.
A very well-known biochemist that did experiments
in which he starved cells gave them
no external source of energy
but they were still oxidizing something
and it was the dehydrogenase enzymes
which were delivering energy to hydrogen
to oxygen even though there was neither fat nor glucose
provided as a substrate for these enzymes
and so he called it nothing dehydrogenase
and his nothing includes the gaseous form of hydrogen,
because that isn't considered biochemical substrate normally
but his enzymes can actually use gaseous hydrogen
as a substrate and these can not only provide
biological energy but they can have the same effect
on suppressing pre-radical activity
that running your mitochondria under an ordinary glucose
and thyroid system would produce.
- So maybe like these molecular hydrogen tablets
in the water or the generators that are making
molecular hydrogen might not be a bad idea?
- Yeah, or just sniffing gas out of a little tank
of hydrogen.
- Okay, cool.
All right, this is a little bit loaded question.
This is the one I was talking about with the COVID-19.
So please ask Dr. Peat what the specific dietary factors are
that have made Americans so vulnerable to coronavirus
and also what foods should we be eating
to make us resistant to it.
He specifically says what else can I eat to protect it
once it comes around again this winter or if it comes around?
It's interesting to note though that it's like
how can they say that it's gonna come back around?
You know, like how do they know that?
And it just makes you wonder like you said
the powers that be like how do they know
it's gonna come back around?
- There are some interesting videos
that give some of the background
that had never been publicly widely discussed
showing that in previous years
that they called it the flu season.
But influenza was never the exclusive infection thing.
A large block of the so-called influenza,
no pathogen could be identified at all.
Sometimes it was a bacteria responsible
but I think it was 14% of all of the
in which they looked for the pathogen,
14%, seven to 14% were typical in previous years
coronavirus infections.
And three of those were the serious type
that happened to overlap with laboratory-designed
intensified versions of the coronavirus.
But everyone, the coronavirus previously
had been known as a cold virus.
Several viruses were called the common cold.
Several studies in just the last couple of years have,
for example, the Pentagon did a study
to evaluate how effective the influenza vaccine
was at preventing influenza.
And they found, or at least did their best
to interpret an effectiveness for the flu vaccine
and concluded that it was probably 45% effective
at preventing influenza infections in the following season.
But during that season, the people,
different studies found twice as many infections
by other agents up to six times as many infections
by something other than influenza.
So while it was shifting almost half away from influenza,
it was doubling or tripling or quadrupling
the number of lung diseases caused by other agents,
including the coronavirus.
And so if you look at the campaign,
very heavy indoctrination, pushing the vaccine
on old people in both the United States and Italy
last year before the onset of the coronavirus,
of the 2019, 2020 flu season,
they were basically reducing the likelihood
of a flu infection, but greatly increasing,
according to these studies,
the likelihood of catching some other lung disease.
So the first thing is not to worry so much
about food or supplements or whatever,
but to think about what's going on with the actual publicity
about protecting against lung disease,
the influenza vaccine, especially in old people,
powerfully increases the risk of lung diseases.
There are eight or 10 studies showing that.
- Yeah, and it's never a bad thing to promote immunity,
like build your immune system
to fight all kinds of things we come into contact with,
but I agree with what you're saying.
Go ahead.
- Yeah, the antibody system is not our immune system.
It's something that has been fixated on
for more than 100 years driven by the pharmaceutical industry
who wants to equate natural immunity,
if they can interpret natural immunity
as the presence of antibodies.
They want to equate it with their magic bullet drugs.
It all derives from Paul Ehrlich's doctrine,
but he shared the Nobel Prize with an embryologist
who was interested in the whole body's participation
in immunity, and that's the innate immune system
that has been really suppressed and ignored
over these 110 years, and it's our general health,
especially at vitamin D and thyroid,
the things that let us maintain the balance
between carbon dioxide and lactic acid
that activates in the proper way this innate immune system.
- Absolutely, drop the mic on that one
because it's like, improve your thyroid
and everything else kind of falls into place,
and then also get out in the sunshine
because sunshine, if we're talking coronavirus,
is actually killed, it kills coronavirus
in like a minute and a half
according to some studies I read, so.
- The action of vitamin D and calcium,
it's increasingly recognized as absolutely vital,
especially for viral immunity, but for immunity in general,
and what it's doing is not killing viruses,
it's activating our anti-inflammatory processes,
so it's working with aspirin, stopping inflammation,
and it's the people who have a predisposing
inflammatory condition who even catch the virus
or develop any symptoms from it.
Something between 50 and 80% of the population
can have the virus with absolutely no harm done.
It's someone with a preexisting inflammatory problem
often from low thyroid, low vitamin D,
low vitamin A, some malnutrition
who have the inflammation that promotes
the growth of the virus, so focusing on killing the virus
is a completely unbiological idea.
- Okay, very good.
Ann says, can the doctor speak about the best way
to lose 20 pounds, especially on my hips and thighs?
I recently went to the doctor and was told
I needed to lose 20 pounds,
and specifically I carry it in my lower body,
what can I do for this?
- The woman I told you had such a resistance
to thyroid hormone.
That was her physique.
You can see her ribs and her arms
were about like a five-year-old child,
but her hips were so wide that she actually had trouble
going through a standard doorway.
So you have to look at your whole physiology,
not just go by a doctor's TSH measurement,
but you have to look at your vitamin D,
make sure your parathyroid hormone is at the low end
of the normal range.
When your thyroid and vitamin D are being interfered with
or are simply deficient, your parathyroid hormone rises,
just eating too much phosphate, meat and beans,
for example, are characteristic excess phosphate sources.
Too much phosphate will drive up your parathyroid hormone
the same way vitamin D deficiency
or calcium deficiency will drive it up,
and parathyroid hormone poisons your mitochondrial
energy-producing system, so you can't lose weight
if your parathyroid hormone is in the above average range.
And if you normalize that, you don't have to worry
about losing weight because ordinary activity
and diet will get rid of it.
- Okay, good.
All right, do you have time for one more question?
- Sure. - Okay.
I do have a few more that we didn't get to,
but I wanna give us one more little question here.
I asked Dr. Peat, if one does not have access to thyroid,
can other measures suffice?
So I guess he's saying if he doesn't have access
to thyroid supplements, how do I work around that?
And secondly, I don't have a gallbladder,
how can I improve my digestion?
- Well, lots of things will fill in, like I mentioned,
I was using coffee to make up for low thyroid function,
but vitamin D and calcium are powerful activators
of the energy system because they keep
your parathyroid hormone down.
Having all of your minerals, both minerals and trace minerals
are very important to keep your mitochondria
operating properly.
- Okay, good.
That was easy enough.
What about the gallbladder?
- You don't wanna eat a lot of fat at any time,
but just the small amount that helps you absorb
your vitamin D and vitamin A, for example,
really just takes a minimal amount mixed in with your food.
And it's a very fatty meal that will trigger the need
for a gallbladder function.
So a fairly low-fat diet and moderate-sized meals,
people don't really suffer from lacking the gallbladder.
- Okay, and do you know anything?
Like I've heard that coconut oil isn't in need of bile
when you take in coconut oil, it really doesn't need bile
to break it down, so that could be a fat
that they could take in.
Is that the case?
- It's still not good to trigger the reflexes
when you don't have the gallbladder.
I think it could cause some kind of disturbance.
I think it's better to keep that low too.
- That makes sense.
Okay, Dr. Peat, well, that's the time we have for today
for questions, so we'll jump into the few that we missed
on the next call, so I really appreciate it.
It's always so interesting talking to you
because you get me thinking on so many levels.
So I'm gonna go check out some negative ion generators.
I think I even saw one while I was talking to you
called the molecule that looked interesting
and it said it had no ozone.
So maybe these folks that he answered your questions,
maybe you can send him a little donation
and that way he can get himself another ion generator.
'Cause yeah, I like to have one too,
but I'm gonna have to save up for it.
They're kind of pricey, so.
- I paid $30 or something like that.
I think you can still find them for $35, $40.
- Okay, all right, cool.
Well, I'll definitely look into that.
Thank you so much, Dr. Peat.
This has been fun and we'll do it again soon.
- Okay, thank you.
- Okay.
(upbeat music)
[BLANK_AUDIO]